README.md, before:

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/gae123/sd2.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/gae123/sd2)

# sd<sup>2</sup>: Powering Software Defined Software Development™
The Software Defined Software Development Process aka sd<sup>2</sup> (pronounced 
sd-square) aims to assist developers 
who work concurrently with multiple source bases, 
each with multiple branches and each potentially with its own technology
stack. 

sd<sup>2</sup> relies heavily on a **single** text configuration
file that describes a developer's development environments. It also relies
 heavily on containers 
that isolate the different environments. sd<sup>2</sup> seperates the editing 
environment from the environment where compilation and testing takes place. 
In some sense, sd2 brings the advantages of a microservices environment to 
the development phase, even when you do not use microservices in your
architecture.

This repository provides a tool called `sd2` that assists developers embracing the
sd<sup>2</sup> process.

## The Basic Concepts
In sd<sup>2</sup> you split your editing, browsing and source control activities 
from all 
the other development activities. Editing is done on your developer 
workstation that we will call editing host(EH). All the other development 
activities are performed in containers (DC) that can run anywhere you want. 
The containers run on hosts that we call development hosts (DH).

![Use Case](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1uO3umvqVMIM2HnrXJwRAgAX2UWRYNVqEKDTNggXlEIc/pub?w=960&h=720)

## sd2 advantages
1. First of all, sd2 builds on top of all the lightweight virtualization advantages:
    1. Start a development stack in milliseconds, exactly the same stack you started last time.
    1. Keep multiple development stacks isolated from each other. 
       So now you can work on multiple projects (or releases of the same project) 
    with incompatible stacks at the same time.
    1. Version independently your 
    EH from your DH & DC. Gone are the days where upgrading to the next version
    of MacOS broke a number of your development projects.
    1. Ensure that every
     developer in the team has exactly the 
    same development stack independent of the editing environment they use.
1. sd2 uses a combination of technologies to make sure that when you change a file on 
the EH, the file is copied to the destination(s) almost instanteneoulsy.
1. All generated files/artifacts are generated in the DHs. Since you only 
commit on EHs, there is no chance for accidentally commit generated artifacts.
1. Modern IDEs are heavyweight and have perofrmance requirements that increase 
with bigger projects. sd2 uses multiple replicas of the source code so both the 
IDE and the compilers/transpilers/toolchain can work independently.
1. If your source code targets multiple output platforms you can very efficiently 
simultaneoulsy make a change in one place and have it compile and run in all 
the target platforms.

       
## How to set it up
sd2 relies on one or more configuration files that define your DHs, 
your conainers/images, 
and your repositories/workspaces. The configuration file needs to be in your 
home directory 
under .sd2 (ie ~/.sd2/config.yaml). 

sd2 reads the configuration 
file and takes all the actions needed to maintain the connections and replicate 
the repositories in real time as they change in the EH computer.
If you change the configuration file, sd2 will automatically change what 
it is doing to match the new configuration.

You can download the appropriate sd2 binary for your platform 
from the [releases](https://github.com/gae123/sd2/releases) section. Put it
somewhere so that it is in your PATH, create your configuration file that 
describes your environment, open a terminal and run sd2 from the command line.

Make sure you read [the detailed directions](build/how-to-install.md)

## Configuration 

**Location**: When sd2 starts it reads its configuration from `~/.sd2/config.yaml` 
(or in `$SD2_CONFIG_DIR/config.yaml` if this variable is set). 

**Syntax**: This file
has four main sections. One that describes the DHs, one that describes the 
containers images, one that describes containers
 and one that describes the workspaces that you want to be
synced into the DHs. There is a json schema for the file that you can find
[here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gae123/sd2/master/src/lib/sd2/config_schema.json).
There can be multiple configuration files, multiple sections with the same
name can be there. For instance if you work on project foo and bar with different
stacks you can have three files in the directory: `config.yaml` for the common
things (e.g. shared hosts), `foo-config.yaml` for the foo project and 
`bar-config.yaml` for the bar project. `sd2` will parse all of them.

**Examples**
A very simple configuration file is shown 
[here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gae123/sd2/master/examples/config-1/config.yaml)
It will start two containers on a host called paros that run an image 
that has ubuntu 16.04, ssh and nginx.
The first container will be called paros-0 and the second will be called paros-1. From the
EH, you
should be able to ssh to paros-0 and paros-1. You will find yourself in your
own home directory in paros, using your username. On your EH 
you should be able to open 
a browser and point it to http://paros-0 or http://paros-1 and see the nginx
page.

A second example is shown 
[here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gae123/sd2/master/examples/config-2/config.yaml). 
It builds on the first one by adding two workspaces *0.sd2* and *1.sd2* that are
replicated into the containers under /tmp. Note how the workspaces 
configuration sections are built using inheritance
to avoid replicating the "exclude" paths.  *0.sd2* and *1.sd2* inherit from *sd2* which
inherits from *any*.

Another example shown
[here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gae123/sd2/master/examples/config-2/config.yaml)
shows two images *ubuntu1404* and *ubuntu1604*. It also adds four containers
*paros-0*, *paros-1*, *paros-2* and *paros-3*. *paros-0* and *paros-1* use the 
*ubuntu1404*
image. The other two containers use the *ubuntu1604* image.
Finally, there are two workspaces *0.sd2* and *1.sd2*. *0.sd2* is replicated to *paros-0*
and *paros-2*. *1.sd2* is replicated to *paros-1* and *paros-3*.


## Advanced Configuration Topics
**Expansion**:
String values are treated as [python string templates](https://docs.python.org/2/library/string.html#template-strings) with the already parsed
config file as the context. So for instance if you put `$name` or `${name}` somewhere it will
be substituted by the earlier value of name. (If you need to 
use the dollar sign character `$$` to escape `$`). Environment variables are also
available this way.

**Jinja Template Support**
If the config.yaml file starts with the line `#!jinja2`
sd2 treats the configuration file as a [jinja2 template](http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/2.9/). 
The tool first processes the jinja2 file
and then parses it as yaml. 
 
 By default, a dictionary with the environment variables
is passed as the context for the jinja2 template rendering. So for instance if
you have `{{USER}}` in the file it will be substituted with the USER environment
variable.

Furthermore, if there is an executable called ~/.sd2/config,
the executable is first executed, and its output is treated as json. Then this json
is parsed and provided as context to the the jinja2 parser. This allows to do 
very cool initializations based on the source code. For instance, you can have
each branch use a different image and have the version of the docker image
in the source code. The executable will make this information to the 
configuration file and the daemon.

**Inheritance**
In the workspaces and hosts sections you can create abstract sections that do 
not describe a workspace or host but provide some key/values pairs that will 
be inherited by other sections.

**Multiple configuration files**
If the tool finds more that one files in ~/.sd2 that end with `config.yaml`
it will read and parse all the files and merge them together. This is a great
way to separate the configuration of unrelated projects.

## What is not covered by sd<sup>2</sup>
1. Bring your own editor/IDE. sd<sup>2</sup> is agnostic on how you edit 
   your source code.
1. Bring your own container images. sd<sup>2</sup> does not provide tools to 
   generate docker images, we expect that are already available and published in 
 a local or remote repository.
1. Although this might change in the future, you are currently responsible to
   set up your DH (a DH really only needs an account with your user name,
   ssh access and docker + rsync installed).
 
 
## Troubleshooting
1. Start the command as `sd2 --showconfig`. It will show the config file
as it is after substitutions and will exit.
1. Start the daemon by running `sd2`. You can see logs running `sd2 logs`
1. Start the command as `sd2 --showschema`. It will show the json schema file.
1. Try to ssh to the DHs. You should be able to ssh to any of them from a 
terminal in your EH.
1. You can access a container in a DH with the following command:  
`ssh -t <<DH>> sudo docker exec -it <<CONTAINER NAME>>  su - $USER`  
Of course in the local case you do not need the ssh part. This is the preferred
way to get shell access to the container.
1. You can see the containers running on a DH by runnign `sudo ssh <<DH>> sudo docker ps`
1. You can delete all the containers runnin on a DH by running 
`sudo ssh <<DH>> 'sudo docker rm -f $(docker ps -qa)'`
 
## FAQ
1. When I run docker directly on the MacOS can I just mount the MacOS 
file system on the container?  
This will work but in most cases, but 
it will have severe performance implications for many common use cases. 
You can read more about the issue [here](https://forums.docker.com/t/file-access-in-mounted-volumes-extremely-slow-cpu-bound/8076/174).
1. Is sd2 secure when the development host is across the internet?  
sd2 always uses ssh to communicate from the editing machine to the 
development machine so it is as secure as ssh itself.
1. Is sd2 slow when my EH is my mac and my DH is in AWS or some other cloud?
  Try it, you will be amazed how fast it is. This is a very common use case
  of sd2.
1. Why would I ever want to copy the files to the DH instead of the container itself?  
The lifetime of a container is expected to be much shorter than the lifetime of a DH. 
By replicating the repositories to the DH and mount them in the container you save the 
time of continously replicating to new containers and save space when you want 
multiple containers to access the same repository.
1. What are the system files that sd2 alters:
    1. `/etc/hosts`
    1. `~/.ssh/config`  
    
    All the changes are done in a very safe way that does not alter what is 
    already in the files.
1. What IP addresses do the containers use?  
    The system automatically assigns addresses in the 172.30.X.X private address
    range. It uses a mini json cache in ~/.config/.sd2-cidr-db to give the 
    same IP every time. You can override these defaults with environment variables.
1. Can I have more than one configuration file?
    sd2 reads all the files in `~/.sd2` ending in -config.yaml so it is possible
    and highly encouraged if you work in multiple projects
 
## Future Directions
1. Many times I have thought that this separation should take one more step
where the development environment can be different from the execution environment.
In this directions, you have EH, DH, DC and one more set of environments called ECs 
where the code runs. Currently the generated artifacts are deployed in 
the DC itself that plays a dual role.
1. Many frameworks, e.g. kubernetes and swarm slightly overlap on the container
lifetime management. For now, I have decided to keep things simple and only rely
on ssh & friends but I can see how in the future this could be expanded to embrace
and leverage such frameworks.
1. The implemenation is in python but relies a lot on unix tools. I am 
sure people would want a Windows port.

## How to develop the tool itself
1. Fork the repository
1. Build the source code by running `cd build; make`
1. The main program is in bin/sd2 start from there for testing personal user
1. When ready to push change the version number at the top of build/Makefile and run `make push`

Commit message:

Rollover log file ever time sd2 restarts

README.md, after:

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/gae123/sd2.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/gae123/sd2)

# sd<sup>2</sup>: Powering Software Defined Software Development™
The Software Defined Software Development Process aka sd<sup>2</sup> (pronounced 
sd-square) aims to assist developers 
who work concurrently with multiple source bases, 
each with multiple branches and each potentially with its own technology
stack. 

sd<sup>2</sup> relies heavily on a **single** text configuration
file that describes a developer's development environments. It also relies
 heavily on containers 
that isolate the different environments. sd<sup>2</sup> seperates the editing 
environment from the environment where compilation and testing takes place. 
In some sense, sd2 brings the advantages of a microservices environment to 
the development phase, even when you do not use microservices in your
architecture.

This repository provides a tool called `sd2` that assists developers embracing the
sd<sup>2</sup> process.

## The Basic Concepts
In sd<sup>2</sup> you split your editing, browsing and source control activities 
from all 
the other development activities. Editing is done on your developer 
workstation that we will call editing host(EH). All the other development 
activities are performed in containers (DC) that can run anywhere you want. 
The containers run on hosts that we call development hosts (DH).

![Use Case](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1uO3umvqVMIM2HnrXJwRAgAX2UWRYNVqEKDTNggXlEIc/pub?w=960&h=720)

## sd2 advantages
1. First of all, sd2 builds on top of all the lightweight virtualization advantages:
    1. Start a development stack in milliseconds, exactly the same stack you started last time.
    1. Keep multiple development stacks isolated from each other. 
       So now you can work on multiple projects (or releases of the same project) 
    with incompatible stacks at the same time.
    1. Version independently your 
    EH from your DH & DC. Gone are the days where upgrading to the next version
    of MacOS broke a number of your development projects.
    1. Ensure that every
     developer in the team has exactly the 
    same development stack independent of the editing environment they use.
1. sd2 uses a combination of technologies to make sure that when you change a file on 
the EH, the file is copied to the destination(s) almost instanteneoulsy.
1. All generated files/artifacts are generated in the DHs. Since you only 
commit on EHs, there is no chance for accidentally commit generated artifacts.
1. Modern IDEs are heavyweight and have perofrmance requirements that increase 
with bigger projects. sd2 uses multiple replicas of the source code so both the 
IDE and the compilers/transpilers/toolchain can work independently.
1. If your source code targets multiple output platforms you can very efficiently 
simultaneoulsy make a change in one place and have it compile and run in all 
the target platforms.

       
## How to set it up
sd2 relies on one or more configuration files that define your DHs, 
your conainers/images, 
and your repositories/workspaces. The configuration file needs to be in your 
home directory 
under .sd2 (ie ~/.sd2/config.yaml). 

sd2 reads the configuration 
file and takes all the actions needed to maintain the connections and replicate 
the repositories in real time as they change in the EH computer.
If you change the configuration file, sd2 will automatically change what 
it is doing to match the new configuration.

You can download the appropriate sd2 binary for your platform 
from the [releases](https://github.com/gae123/sd2/releases) section. Put it
somewhere so that it is in your PATH, create your configuration file that 
describes your environment, open a terminal and run sd2 from the command line.

Make sure you read [the detailed directions](build/how-to-install.md)

## Configuration 

**Location**: When sd2 starts it reads its configuration from `~/.sd2/config.yaml` 
(or in `$SD2_CONFIG_DIR/config.yaml` if this variable is set). 

**Syntax**: This file
has four main sections. One that describes the DHs, one that describes the 
containers images, one that describes containers
 and one that describes the workspaces that you want to be
synced into the DHs. There is a json schema for the file that you can find
[here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gae123/sd2/master/src/lib/sd2/config_schema.json).
There can be multiple configuration files, multiple sections with the same
name can be there. For instance if you work on project foo and bar with different
stacks you can have three files in the directory: `config.yaml` for the common
things (e.g. shared hosts), `foo-config.yaml` for the foo project and 
`bar-config.yaml` for the bar project. `sd2` will parse all of them.

**Examples**
A very simple configuration file is shown 
[here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gae123/sd2/master/examples/config-1/config.yaml)
It will start two containers on a host called paros that run an image 
that has ubuntu 16.04, ssh and nginx.
The first container will be called paros-0 and the second will be called paros-1. From the
EH, you
should be able to ssh to paros-0 and paros-1. You will find yourself in your
own home directory in paros, using your username. On your EH 
you should be able to open 
a browser and point it to http://paros-0 or http://paros-1 and see the nginx
page.

A second example is shown 
[here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gae123/sd2/master/examples/config-2/config.yaml). 
It builds on the first one by adding two workspaces *0.sd2* and *1.sd2* that are
replicated into the containers under /tmp. Note how the workspaces 
configuration sections are built using inheritance
to avoid replicating the "exclude" paths.  *0.sd2* and *1.sd2* inherit from *sd2* which
inherits from *any*.

Another example shown
[here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gae123/sd2/master/examples/config-2/config.yaml)
shows two images *ubuntu1404* and *ubuntu1604*. It also adds four containers
*paros-0*, *paros-1*, *paros-2* and *paros-3*. *paros-0* and *paros-1* use the 
*ubuntu1404*
image. The other two containers use the *ubuntu1604* image.
Finally, there are two workspaces *0.sd2* and *1.sd2*. *0.sd2* is replicated to *paros-0*
and *paros-2*. *1.sd2* is replicated to *paros-1* and *paros-3*.


## Advanced Configuration Topics
**Expansion**:
String values are treated as [python string templates](https://docs.python.org/2/library/string.html#template-strings) with the already parsed
config file as the context. So for instance if you put `$name` or `${name}` somewhere it will
be substituted by the earlier value of name. (If you need to 
use the dollar sign character `$$` to escape `$`). Environment variables are also
available this way.

**Jinja Template Support**
If the config.yaml file starts with the line `#!jinja2`
sd2 treats the configuration file as a [jinja2 template](http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/2.9/). 
The tool first processes the jinja2 file
and then parses it as yaml. 
 
 By default, a dictionary with the environment variables
is passed as the context for the jinja2 template rendering. So for instance if
you have `{{USER}}` in the file it will be substituted with the USER environment
variable.

Furthermore, if there is an executable called ~/.sd2/config,
the executable is first executed, and its output is treated as json. Then this json
is parsed and provided as context to the the jinja2 parser. This allows to do 
very cool initializations based on the source code. For instance, you can have
each branch use a different image and have the version of the docker image
in the source code. The executable will make this information to the 
configuration file and the daemon.

**Inheritance**
In the workspaces and hosts sections you can create abstract sections that do 
not describe a workspace or host but provide some key/values pairs that will 
be inherited by other sections.

**Multiple configuration files**
If the tool finds more that one files in ~/.sd2 that end with `config.yaml`
it will read and parse all the files and merge them together. This is a great
way to separate the configuration of unrelated projects.

## What is not covered by sd<sup>2</sup>
1. Bring your own editor/IDE. sd<sup>2</sup> is agnostic on how you edit 
   your source code.
1. Bring your own container images. sd<sup>2</sup> does not provide tools to 
   generate docker images, we expect that are already available and published in 
 a local or remote repository.
1. Although this might change in the future, you are currently responsible to
   set up your DH (a DH really only needs an account with your user name,
   ssh access and docker + rsync installed).
 
 
## Troubleshooting
1. Start the command as `sd2 --showconfig`. It will show the config file
as it is after substitutions and will exit.
1. Start the daemon by running `sd2`. You can see logs running `sd2 logs`
    1. The logs rotate every time you restart sd2. You can find the current log
    file in `/var/logs/sd2/sd2.log`, the previous one in `sd2.log.1` etc
    2. Look for the events starting with `HH:` to see whether the hosts are 
       reported healthy as expected.
2. Start the command as `sd2 --showschema`. It will show the json schema file.
3. Try to ssh to the DHs. You should be able to ssh to any of them from a 
terminal in your EH.
1. You can access a container in a DH with the following command:  
`ssh -t <<DH>> sudo docker exec -it <<CONTAINER NAME>>  su - $USER`  
Of course in the local case you do not need the ssh part. This is the preferred
way to get shell access to the container.
1. You can see the containers running on a DH by runnign `sudo ssh <<DH>> sudo docker ps`
1. You can delete all the containers runnin on a DH by running 
`sudo ssh <<DH>> 'sudo docker rm -f $(docker ps -qa)'`
 
## FAQ
1. When I run docker directly on the MacOS can I just mount the MacOS 
file system on the container?  
This will work but in most cases, but 
it will have severe performance implications for many common use cases. 
You can read more about the issue [here](https://forums.docker.com/t/file-access-in-mounted-volumes-extremely-slow-cpu-bound/8076/174).
1. Is sd2 secure when the development host is across the internet?  
sd2 always uses ssh to communicate from the editing machine to the 
development machine so it is as secure as ssh itself.
1. Is sd2 slow when my EH is my mac and my DH is in AWS or some other cloud?
  Try it, you will be amazed how fast it is. This is a very common use case
  of sd2.
1. Why would I ever want to copy the files to the DH instead of the container itself?  
The lifetime of a container is expected to be much shorter than the lifetime of a DH. 
By replicating the repositories to the DH and mount them in the container you save the 
time of continously replicating to new containers and save space when you want 
multiple containers to access the same repository.
1. What are the system files that sd2 alters:
    1. `/etc/hosts`
    1. `~/.ssh/config`  
    
    All the changes are done in a very safe way that does not alter what is 
    already in the files.
1. What IP addresses do the containers use?  
    The system automatically assigns addresses in the 172.30.X.X private address
    range. It uses a mini json cache in ~/.config/.sd2-cidr-db to give the 
    same IP every time. You can override these defaults with environment variables.
1. Can I have more than one configuration file?
    sd2 reads all the files in `~/.sd2` ending in -config.yaml so it is possible
    and highly encouraged if you work in multiple projects
 
## Future Directions
1. Many times I have thought that this separation should take one more step
where the development environment can be different from the execution environment.
In this directions, you have EH, DH, DC and one more set of environments called ECs 
where the code runs. Currently the generated artifacts are deployed in 
the DC itself that plays a dual role.
1. Many frameworks, e.g. kubernetes and swarm slightly overlap on the container
lifetime management. For now, I have decided to keep things simple and only rely
on ssh & friends but I can see how in the future this could be expanded to embrace
and leverage such frameworks.
1. The implemenation is in python but relies a lot on unix tools. I am 
sure people would want a Windows port.

## How to develop the tool itself
1. Fork the repository
1. Build the source code by running `cd build; make`
1. The main program is in bin/sd2 start from there for testing personal user
1. When ready to push change the version number at the top of build/Makefile and run `make push`
